Slides:

**Introduction**. My talk is going to be about how we can hopefully use a combination of quantum chemistry and machine learning methods for the generation of approximate vibrational spectral data. 

**The search for life in outer space**. One of the big questions we're interested in, is 'is there life beyond Earth?'. This is obviously quite a challenging question to address but one of the ways we can address it is by searching for tell tale signs of life in exoplanet atmospheres. We define an exoplanet as really any planet that lies beyond our solar system. We've discovered many of these planets that are quite similar to Earth even. A further challenge arises when we consider that these exoplanets are quite a distance away from Earth so a manned mission or even a probe mission to investigate them aren't feasible. But thanks to spectroscopy we can still derive valuable information from the atmospheres of these planets.

**Biosignatures**. What we're looking for when examining these exoplanet atmospheres is biosignatures. A biosignature is any molecule thought to be produced by life that we can detect remotely with our telescopes.  

**High-resolution spectral data for molecular detections**. Our ability to detect these biosignatures is dependent upon the availability of high resolution spectral data and there is quite a limitation in terms of the availability of this data as both methods of producing this experimentally and computationally are quite time intensive procedures. 

**Filling the gap**. So in order to address this data limitation my group, particularly Juan has focused on the development of a high-throughput workflow that is capable of generating approximate spectral data for thousands of these molecules. As this data is approximate it isn't capable of being used for definitive identification it is still a powerful data source that can be used for identifying unknown spectral features. Where I hope to pick up on this line of thinking, is can we supplement this workflow with machine learning techniques in order to scale up this data generation process. 

A significant focus of the search for extraterrestrial life lies in the study of exoplanets. An exoplanet is basically any planet the lays behind our solar system. These exoplanets tend to be a significant distance from us here on Earth, so simply sending a probe out to visit these planets isn't possible. That leaves spectroscopy as our primary means of studying these planets.   

This molecule is an example of a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon. They are a class of molecule very important to astronomers for a number of reasons, one of which is that they were thought to act as building blocks for the complex organic molecules that were related to the origin of life. 

Unfortunately these molecules are a complex structure property relationship which means they identifying their infrared spectrum can be a challenge. Additionally, there's a vast number of them molecules so even using computationally efficient methods such as DFT to calculate every possible example of these molecules isn't feasible. 

So this leaves us with the goal of developing an efficient methodology to generate the spectra of these molecules such that we can empower astronomers to characterise the interstellar medium. **UIE: Unidentified infrared emissions** 

Fortunately, Kovacs and coworkers have laid an excellent foundation for approaching this problem using ML. They decided to use an ML based approach to make predictions of the spectra of these molecules to great success and they succeeded with orders of magnitude less computational expense than what would have been required from a first principles calculation.

**Where to now?**. McGill and coauthors have established an amazing foundation for the use of ML based approaches in predicting infrared spectra. We hope to build upon their work in two key areas. First, their model makes use of computed spectra calculated using the GFN2-xTB level of theory, which is a semi-empirical level of theory aimed towards the efficient production of spectral data. Our group has produced spectral data using B97-1/def2-TZVPD model chemistry which should serve as a more accurate source of training data. 

[[Spectrum Peak Broadening Procedure]]

**Exploring chemical space**. An interesting idea that arises from McGill and coauthors paper that I earlier mentioned is this idea of quantifying chemical space using molecular similarity metrics. In their approach they utilised a metric called the Tanimoto coefficient to represent their models predictive ability as a function of a given molecules similarity to all the other molecules they considered. They found that molecules in their test set performed poorly when they were chemically dissimilar to the molecules found in their train set which isn't a novel or surprising result but it does make us wonder how best we can address this deficiency of training data to cover the chemical space considered in astronomy applications. This is important as there is a wide variety of molecular classes to consider across the interstellar medium, terrestrial environments and even hot Jupiter environments.

**What is ML anyway?** Unfortunately this explanation is going to come with some nomenclature but I'll try my best not to inundate you. What we've discussed so far have been examples of what we'd call supervised learning. That's where we have some inputs and we have a model and that model will produce some output that we can compare against our true values to judge how accurate it will be. There's definitely some hand waving in that explanation but this approach isn't too dissimilar to what we might expect in traditional computational chemistry approaches. In our physics based models for comparison we can see that we also have some input that gets passed to our model, this model is instead based on some approximation to the Schrodinger equation. The defining difference however comes from this arrow here, in which our models have the ability to learn from the data and optimise for producing the best result it can produce (we hope).

Links:

https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10509-022-04045-6#:~:text=The%20UIE%20carriers%20represent%20a,as%20probes%20of%20galactic%20evolution.


